Highlighting the Potential of Synergistic Cu−Pt Single-Atom Alloy
Sub-nanoclusters for Enhanced H2 Adsorption: A DFT Investigation
João Paulo Cerqueira Felix, Wanderson Souza Araújo, João Marcos Tomaz Palheta,
Jônatas Favotto Dalmedico, Fabiano Pereira de Oliveira, Alexandre C. Dias, Diego Guedes-Sobrinho,
Celso R. C. Rêgo, Renato L. T. Parreira, and Maurício J. Piotrowski*
Cite This: ACS Nanosci. Au 2025, 5, 153−164
Read Online
ACCESS
Metrics & More
Article Recommendations
*
sı
Supporting Information
ABSTRACT: Single-atom alloy sub-nanoclusters offer promising potential
for understanding intricate interfacial phenomena at the atomic level,
enabling the rational design of efficient catalysts and nanomaterials for H2
energy storage, purification, and conversion. Herein, we employed density
functional theory calculations improved by van der Waals corrections to
investigate H2 adsorption on pure copper (Cun) and copper−platinum
(Cun−1Pt) sub-nanoclusters. We characterized Cun sub-nanoclusters ranging
from n = 2 to n = 14, identifying the most stable sizes (4, 6, 8, 10, and 12)
through a set of stability analysis. Subsequently, we substituted a single Cu
atom with Pt to form single-atom alloy Cun−1Pt sub-nanoclusters, which
showed enhanced stabilization and reactivity compared to pure Cu sub-
nanoclusters. While Cu-only sub-nanoclusters exhibited weak side-on
interactions with H2, resulting in minimal charge transfer and negligible
structural changes, CuPt-based sub-nanoclusters showed strong interactions
characterized by molecular dissociation (H−H bond breaking) and significant charge transfer from the sub-nanoclusters to the H
atoms. These findings highlight the synergistic effects of the Cu−Pt combination and provide valuable insights into the fundamental
processes of H2 adsorption on metal sub-nanoclusters, with significant implications for catalytic applications and materials design in
hydrogen-related technologies.
KEYWORDS: Density functional theory, Cu and CuPt sub-nanoclusters, H2 molecule, molecular adsorption, single-atom alloy
1. INTRODUCTION
Nanocluster metal-containing catalysts are essential in
heterogeneous, homogeneous, and enzymatic catalysis, playing
a pivotal role in achieving high selectivity, thermal stability,
recyclability, and effective product-catalyst separation. These
features are crucial in many fields, especially in the quest for
sustainable energy generation.1−3 Among the promising
candidates for efficient catalysts are metallic sub-nanoclusters,
which are composed of a few atoms and exhibit unique
physical and chemical properties.4−6 In the realm of energy
generation and storage, hydrogen (H2) stands out for its
potential to store energy through chemical bonds.7 The
current landscape highlights a stark contrast between the
production of H2 from renewable sources, known as green
hydrogen, and fossil fuels.8
Green hydrogen production methods, such as water
electrolysis, catalysis, and biomass conversion, aim to minimize
environmental impact by generating hydrogen without residual
pollution. Thus, experimental and theoretical studies of
metallic nanoclusters and, more recently, single-atom alloy
(SAA) nanoclusters9 have identified them as promising
catalysts.3,6,10,11 SAAs are a type of bimetallic catalyst where
isolated atoms of one metal (often a noble or transition metal)
are dispersed within the host lattice of another metal, forming a
dilute alloy. In these systems, the single atoms serve as the
active sites for catalytic reactions, while the surrounding metal
atoms influence these sites’ electronic properties and stability.
The unique combination of atomic dispersion and the
synergistic effects between the different metals in SAAs often
leads to enhanced catalytic performance, including improved
selectivity and activity compared to traditional bimetallic
catalysts.
Catalysis, mainly via water electrolysis, is crucial for green
hydrogen production. However, a significant barrier persists in
the sluggish kinetics of water reduction to H2 and oxidation to
O2.12 Overcoming this challenge requires the discovery of
Received:
September 19, 2024
Revised:
November 28, 2024
Accepted:
December 5, 2024
Published: December 16, 2024
Article
pubs.acs.org/nanoau
© 2024 The Authors. Published by
American Chemical Society
153
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnanoscienceau.4c00058
ACS Nanosci. Au 2025, 5, 153−164
This article is licensed under CC-BY 4.0
Downloaded via 122.172.87.32 on September 28, 2025 at 05:11:42 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.

efficient and durable catalysts. Metallic sub-nanoclusters have
garnered significant attention due to their diverse applications
in catalysis.10,13,14 These sub-nanoclusters exhibit enhanced
reactivity and catalytic efficiency compared to bulk materials.4,5
SAA systems enhance these properties by atomically dispersing
one metal throughout the catalyst via alloy bonding. This
approach combines the advantages of alloy catalysts with the
unique properties of single-atom catalysts (SAC).15 The
peculiar electronic structures of SACs can be finely tuned by
adjacent bonding atoms through strong metal−support
interaction and/or confinement.
Considerable research has focused on understanding the
relationship between structure and reactivity in sub-nano-
clusters, SACs, and SAAs to improve catalytic performance;
however, the complexity of these systems has made their
rational design challenging, and they remain an area of intense
research.2 SAAs, in particular, consist of single atoms of a
catalytically active metal alloyed into the surface layer of a less
reactive host metal. In the context of nanoclusters, this can be
thought of as single atoms of metal A dispersed on
nanoclusters of metal B.16,17 SAAs offer unique properties,
including improved activity and selectivity compared to
monometallic counterparts and resistance to deactivation and
poisoning.9,16 Most research on these materials has focused on
trace amounts of group 8−10 transition metals alloyed into
group 11 metals.16−18
Therefore, among metallic nanoclusters, copper (Cu) sub-
nanoclusters stand out for their exceptional catalytic activity,
electrical conductivity, and biocompatibility, making them
highly desirable for applications in catalysis, electronics, and
biomedicine.19,20 Understanding the structural stability,
electronic properties, and reactivity of Cu sub-nanoclusters is
crucial for tailoring their functionalities for specific applica-
tions.21 Recent advancements in computational methods,
particularly density functional theory (DFT), have facilitated
accurate predictions of these properties, enabling the rational
design and optimization of Cu sub-nanoclusters.22,23 In
addition to standalone Cu sub-nanoclusters, there is growing
interest in exploring the behavior of Pt-based SAAs, where
individual Pt atoms are dispersed within a matrix of another
metal.24 SAAs exhibit unique catalytic properties arising from
synergistic interactions between the dispersed metal atoms and
the Cu matrix, offering enhanced catalytic performance and
selectivity compared to pure metal catalysts.25
Understanding the interaction between H2 and Cu/CuPt
sub-nanoclusters is crucial for advancing green hydrogen
production catalysis since hydrogen adsorption on metal
nanoclusters is particularly relevant for hydrogen storage and
purification processes, as well as hydrogenation reactions in
catalysis.19,20,26,27 Insights from such studies are instrumental
in engineering nanomaterials tailored for sustainable energy
technologies. By elucidating the interaction mechanisms
between H2 molecules and Cu and CuPt sub-nanoclusters,
this research aims to provide insights into the fundamental
processes governing H2 adsorption on metal nanosystems,
which is essential for developing efficient hydrogen storage
materials and catalysts.
Thus, this study investigates, via DFT calculations, the
structural stability and electronic properties of Cun and Cun−1
Pt sub-nanoclusters (n = 2 to 14), where a single Cu atom is
substituted with a Pt atom. Incorporating Pt into Cu sub-
nanoclusters enhance their catalytic performance and stability,
making Cun−1Pt sub-nanoclusters promising candidates for H2
adsorption and dissociation. By comprehensively characteriz-
ing the structural, electronic, and adsorption properties of H2
on Cun and Cun−1Pt sub-nanoclusters, we aim to provide
fundamental insights into their behavior at the nanoscale. The
findings presented here can help design novel catalysts and
materials with tailored functionalities for H2 applications.
2. METHODOLOGY
2.1. Computational Details
All calculations in this study were based on spin-polarized DFT28,29
by using the (semilocal) generalized gradient approximation for the
exchange-correlation energy functional, as proposed by Perdew,
Burke, and Ernzerhof (PBE).30 Empirical D3 corrections, as proposed
by Grimme,31,32 were included to account for attractive nonlocal long-
range van der Waals (vdW) interactions. The Kohn−Sham (KS)
equations were solved using the all-electron projected augmented
wave (PAW) method,33,34 as implemented in the Vienna Ab initio
Simulation Package (VASP).35,36 In this approach, the valence
electrons were treated using a scalar-relativistic approximation, while
the core electrons were described by fully relativistic calculations.37,38
For the expansion of the KS orbitals, we considered plane waves up
to a cutoff energy of 500 eV for all calculations, which is 20% higher
than the highest value recommended by VASP (ENMAX) among the
selected PAW files. For density of states (DOS) and total energy
calculations, we used a cutoff energy value that was 1.5 times higher.
Our nonperiodic systems were simulated in a cubic box with a side
length of 20 Å, providing a minimum separation distance of
approximately 12 Å, which is enough to avoid the self-interaction
for the largest systems and their periodic images. For Brillouin zone
integration, a single k-point (Γ-point) was used for the sub-
nanoclusters, molecules, and free atoms. A small Gaussian smearing
parameter of 1 meV was applied to prevent fractional occupation of
electronic states.
The convergence criteria for all optimizations were set as follows:
for the ionic loop, equilibrium geometries were considered achieved
when the atomic forces on every atom were smaller than 0.015 eV/Å,
and for the electronic loop, the total energy convergence criterion was
1.0 × 10−6 eV for electronic self-consistency. Additional details
regarding the convergence tests are provided in the Supporting
Information (SI) (Tables S1−S4). To determine the 3N −6 (3N −
5) vibrational modes for three-dimensional (two-dimensional)
systems, the Hessian matrix was calculated using finite differences,
as implemented in VASP. This involved displacing each atom in each
direction by ±0.01 Å. To confirm the thermodynamic stability of the
most stable Cu and CuPt sub-nanoclusters, we employed Ab Initio
Molecular Dynamics (AIMD) simulations using the Born−Oppen-
heimer dynamics approach.39 These simulations began with the
optimized configurations and aimed to verify thermodynamic stability
through a thermalization procedure at 300 K, employing a Nosé−
Hoover thermostat within an NVT ensemble.40,41 The AIMD
simulations were conducted over 5 ps with a time step of 1 fs,
resulting in final configurations that were subsequently structurally
optimized using DFT-PBE+D3 calculations.
2.2. Atomic Configurations
We constructed a set of representative structural motifs following the
structural design principles outlined in our previous works.23,42 From
this set, we obtained the putative global minimum configurations, or
the lowest energy configurations, of Cun (n = 2−14) sub-nanometric
clusters (clu), as shown in Figure 1(a). Our representative set’s
structural and magnetic diversity was based on physical principles
such as symmetry and dimensionality. These included linear, planar,
globular, compact, open, highly symmetric, and amorphous geo-
metries. We also tested different spin configurations (magnetic-like
orderings) and performed structural crossovers among the putative
global minima for each size and transition metal species, as detailed in
the systematic study by Chaves et al.42 for all 30 transition metal
elements. Consequently, the lowest energy configurations of the Cu
ACS Nanoscience Au
pubs.acs.org/nanoau
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnanoscienceau.4c00058
ACS Nanosci. Au 2025, 5, 153−164
154

sub-nanoclusters were obtained from DFT-PBE+D3 optimizations
without imposing any geometric constraints. These results are in
complete agreement with the literature,23,42 and the inclusion of the
vdW D3 corrections did not alter the most stable configurations.43,44
For the H2 adsorption step, we selected certain sub-nanoclusters to
serve as substrates. To identify the most stable sizes of the Cun sub-
nanoclusters, we used the stability function, Δ2E,22,45 a well-
established energetic stability criterion in the context of sub-
nanoclusters.42,46,47 The adapted equation for the stability function
within the range of n = 2−14 is given by
=
+
E
E
E
E
2
2
tot
Cu
tot
Cu
tot
Cu
n
n
n
1
1
(1)
where Etot
Cun represents the total energy of the Cun sub-nanoclusters.
Figure 1(b) illustrates the evolution of Δ2E for Cun sub-nanoclusters
as a function of the number of Cu atoms. Despite the entropic effects
in the experimental apparatus for cluster generation, which produces
many isomers, the sizes with remarkable stability are the most
probable structures.48
In addition to these configurations, we also constructed Cun−1Pt-
type structures, which can be classified as SAA catalysts.9 These sub-
nanoclusters predominantly consist of Cu (acting as the selective
host) with a single Pt atom (serving as the reactive dopant), designed
to leverage the enhanced chemical activity of Pt in a single-atom
context.15 Figure 1(c) displays the lowest energy sizes for Cun sub-
nanoclusters and the corresponding most stable Cun−1Pt sub-
nanoclusters. These Cun−1Pt configurations were identified through
a comprehensive search for the most stable Pt site among all possible
nonequivalent Cu sites in each sub-nanocluster size, followed by
DFT-PBE+D3 optimization.
Using the two sets of configurations shown in Figure 1(c) as
substrates, we explored the H2 molecular adsorption process,
considering two bonding modes: H2 side-on and H2 end-on.49 We
identified the lowest-energy adsorption sites by examining all
nonequivalent positions. Following an approach similar to that used
for low-Miller-index surfaces, we evaluated onefold (top), 2-fold
(bridge), and 3-fold (hollow) sites on the sub-nanoclusters. However,
the chemical diversity of the sub-nanoclusters increased the number
of adsorption possibilities. This diversity stems from variations in
coordination numbers and chemical compositions, particularly for
Cun−1Pt sub-nanoclusters in both H2-bonding modes. Consequently,
we systematically considered all nonequivalent sites with distinct
coordination and composition, including top, bridge, and hollow sites
with varying chemical neighborhoods, placing the H2 molecule in
both side-on and end-on orientations on the sub-nanoclusters.
2.3. Property Analysis
In addition to the stability function and the relative total energy, both
crucial for selecting stable configurations and sizes, we conducted an
analysis of energetic properties, including the binding energy per
atom, Eb
clu:
=
+
E
E
nE
mE
n
m
b
clu
tot
clu
tot
Cu
tot
Pt
(2)
where Etot
clu represents the total energy calculated for the sub-
nanoclusters, while Etot
Cu, Etot
Pt , n and m correspond to the total energies
and number of atoms of the Cu and Pt atomic species, respectively, so
that m = 0 for Cun and m = 1 for Cun−1Pt. We also calculated ΔEb
clu,
which compares the variations of Eb
clu when substituting a Cu atom
with a Pt atom in the sub-nanoclusters:
=
×
E
E
E
E
(
)
100
b
clu
b
Cu
Pt
b
Cu
b
Cu
n
n
n
1
(3)
This equation assesses the change in Eb
clu as a percentage when
transitioning from Cu to Pt atom incorporation in the sub-
nanoclusters, providing insights into the impact of alloying on
binding energies.
For the energetic analysis of H2/clu systems, we computed both
binding and adsorption energies by considering the total energies of
individual constituents and the interaction between H2 and the sub-
nanocluster.47,50,51 The adsorption energy, Eads, is defined as
=
=
+
+
+
E
E
E
E
E
n
m
E
E
(
)
ads
tot
H /clu
tot
clu
tot
H
int
dis
clu
dis
H
2
2
2
(4)
where Etot
H /clu
2
represents the total energy of the H2/clu system. ΔEint
is defined as
=
E
E
E
E
int
tot
H /clu
tot
clufrozen
tot
H frozen
2
2
(5)
Distortion energies, ΔEdis
clu (per atom) and
Edis
H2 (per molecule), are
calculated as
=
+
E
E
E
n
m
dis
clu
tot
clufrozen
tot
clu
(6)
and
=
E
E
E
dis
H
tot
H frozen
tot
H
2
2
2
(7)
where Etot
clu frozen and Etot
H frozen
2
represent the total energies of the frozen
sub-nanoclusters and H2 molecules, respectively, at their original
positions within the H2/clu system. These values indicate the energy
required to distort configurations from their initial to adsorbed stages.
Furthermore, we define the binding energy per atom of the adsorbed
system, Eb,ads, as
=
+
+
=
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
E
E
E
nE
mE
n
m
E
n
m
E
E
E
E
n
m
2
2
2
(
)(
)
2
b
b,ads
tot
H /clu
tot
H
tot
Cu
tot
Pt
H
b
clu
dis
clu
int
dis
H
2
2
2
(8)
This equation incorporates the main energy terms, comprehen-
sively measuring the system’s binding energy.
For structural analyses, we employed the Visualization for
Electronic and Structural Analysis (VESTA) software,52 in addition
to properties such as the average bond length, dav, and the effective
coordination number, ECN, derived from the effective coordination
concept.53,54 The values of dav, ads and ECNads were obtained for the
sub-nanoclusters after adsorption, with molecules subsequently
removed from the analyses. The relative deviation, or percentage
difference between structural values before and after adsorption,
denoted as Δdav and ΔECN, respectively, are given by
=
×
d
d
d
d
(
)
100
av
av,ads
av
av
(9)
and
Figure 1. Methodological process for selecting sub-nanocluster
substrates: (a) the lowest energy structures of Cun (n = 2−14) sub-
nanoclusters; (b) the stability function Δ2E versus the number of Cu
atoms (n); (c) the most stable sizes for Cun sub-nanoclusters and the
corresponding most stable Cun−1Pt sub-nanoclusters.
ACS Nanoscience Au
pubs.acs.org/nanoau
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnanoscienceau.4c00058
ACS Nanosci. Au 2025, 5, 153−164
155

=
×
ECN
(ECN
ECN)
100
ECN
ads
(10)
These represent the percentage expansion or contraction of the sub-
nanocluster with molecular adsorption and relative percentage
coordination. We also considered the equilibrium bond length
distances of H−H molecules and the minimum cluster-molecule
distance, dClu‑mol, using VESTA software. To estimate the alteration in
the molecular bond length upon adsorption, we calculated the
changes before and after adsorption using the equation:
=
×
d
d
d
d
(
)
100
H H
H
H,ads
H
H
H
H
(11)
Furthermore, electronic and charge distribution analyses were
conducted to elucidate our systems’ electronic properties and
interaction mechanisms. We considered the local density of states
(LDOS) for electronic properties, while the charge analysis was based
on a mechanism proposed by Bader.55 This method involves
partitioning the atomic region into volumes known as Bader volumes,
VBader, based on charge density. The zero-flow surface, S(rs),56 is
defined as a surface where the electron density gradient, ∇n(rs), is
perpendicular to the surface, i.e., it is defined as a surface where the
electron density, n(rs), is a minimum, such that
·
=
·
=
n
S
n
r
r
r
n r
( ) ( )
( )
( )
0
s
s
s
s
(12)
where n r( )
s is the unit normal vector to the surface at point rs. This
implies that S(rs) is a surface of minimum electron density flow,
effectively separating regions of electron density into distinct Bader
volumes. In other words, S(rs) serves as the boundary surface of a
Bader volume, ∂VBader. The volume VBader = Vα,s around the atomic site
α possesses an associated charge density, represented as
=
Q
Z
n
r
r( )d
V
s
s
Bader
3
s,
(13)
where Zα denotes the valence of the atomic site α. Various approaches
can determine the volumes VBader, with charges optimized through
topologies such as Voronoi polyhedra.57
3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
All calculations presented in this section were performed using
the DFT-PBE+D3 protocol, which has been widely validated
for the description of transition-metal nanoclusters, as
demonstrated in our previous studies.23,42,46,47,50,58 To verify
the appropriateness of the PBE functional, we conducted
additional tests employing the Tao-Perdew-Staroverov-Scuse-
ria (TPSS) meta-generalized gradient approximation (meta-
GGA),59 which has been shown to be reliable in describing
transition metals.60,61 Additionally, relativistic effects, such as
spin−orbit coupling (SOC), can be significant for heavy
transition metals like Pt, influencing the relative total energies.
Thus, we performed supplementary calculations using the
TPSS+D3 and PBE+D3+SOC protocols, comparing these
results to those obtained with PBE+D3. The outcomes of these
tests are provided in the SI (Figure S2 with Table S5, and
Figure S3 with Table S6, respectively). While these tests are
limited, they confirm the suitability of the PBE+D3 protocol
for our systems, though its limitations and the need for
cautious interpretation are acknowledged.
3.1. Sub-nanocluster Characterization
The lowest energy structures for Cun (n = 2−14) sub-
nanoclusters as depicted in Figure 1(a) have been verified as
true local minima, confirmed for each size through vibrational
mode analysis. In this analysis, all the lowest energy
configurations exhibited only positive (real) vibrational
frequencies (see Figure S1(a)). The structural patterns and
associated property trends of these putative global minimum
structures (as obtained from our scalar-relativistic DFT-PBE
+D3 protocol) are in complete alignment with previous DFT-
PBE studies.23,42 Essentially, the growth pattern of Cu sub-
nanoclusters follows a bias toward triangular units, where
planar structures are preferred up to 6 atoms. Between 6 and 7
atoms, there is a transition from bi- to three-dimensional
structures, as a triangular planar structure (Cu6) transforms
into a close-packed pentagonal bipyramid (Cu7) with
tetrahedral bonds. The Cu7 motif serves as the basic structure
for larger sizes, with additional capped and merged pentagonal
bipyramids forming polytetrahedrons.
The characterization of Cu sub-nanoclusters, as indicated by
the Eb
clu, dav, ECN, and total magnetic moment (mtot) as a
function of the number of atoms, n, is presented in Figure S4.
The magnitude of Eb
clu increases with increasing n, approaching
the cohesive energy for the Cu bulk system (−3.49 eV).62 The
results for dav and ECN can be interpreted through the bond-
order-length-strength correlation,63,64 which suggests that
lower-coordinated (higher-coordinated) atoms tend to have
contracted (elongated) bonds, resulting in enhanced (de-
creased) binding energy. The deviation from monotonic
behavior observed for dav and ECN between 6 and 7 atoms
can be attributed to the transition between planar and globular
growth patterns. Regarding mtot, we observe the characteristic
even−odd alternation typical of coinage-metal sub-nano-
clusters.42,47 This alternation arises from spin polarization
occurring in the delocalized s-like orbitals, which is directly
associated with the Cu valence configuration, specifically, the
presence of an opened s shell (4s1) and filled d states (3d10).
Consequently, sub-nanoclusters with an odd number of atoms
exhibit a total magnetic moment of mtot = 1.0 μB (indicative of
one unpaired electron), while those with an even number of
atoms exhibit mtot = 0.0 μB.
We utilized Δ2E to ascertain the most stable sizes of Cun
within the range of n = 2−14, considering the relative stability
of each sub-nanocluster size with its neighboring sizes. As
depicted in Figure 1(b), the presence of positive peaks enabled
us to identify Cu sub-nanoclusters with an even number of
atoms (4, 6, 8, 10, and 12) as the most energetically favorable
sizes, consistent with prior research.23,42 From these specific
sub-nanoclusters, we explored the substitution of a single Cu
atom with a Pt atom. To achieve this, we subjected all
nonequivalent Cu atoms from each lowest energy size sub-
nanocluster to structural optimization calculations, aiming to
identify the lowest energy Cun−1Pt configuration. Figure 1(c)
presents the most stable configurations of Cun alongside their
corresponding lowest-energy Cun−1Pt sub-nanoclusters. The
stability of these structures was confirmed through vibrational
mode analysis, which showed that all lowest-energy Cu and
CuPt configurations exhibited only positive (real) vibrational
frequencies (see Figure S1(b)). Additionally, thermodynamic
stability was verified via AIMD simulations, as detailed in
Figure S5. These simulations demonstrated that the most
stable configurations remained structurally stable at room
temperature, with properties before and after the AIMD
simulations remaining consistent, as summarized in Table S7.
Furthermore, a comparative analysis of the properties of Cun
and Cun−1Pt sub-nanoclusters, including |Eb|, dav, ECN, and
mtot, as a function of n, is provided in Figure 2.
Qualitatively, the same structural motifs are found for both
Cun and Cun−1Pt systems (see Figure 1(c)). Substituting a Cu
atom with a Pt atom does not alter the overall geometry of the
ACS Nanoscience Au
pubs.acs.org/nanoau
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnanoscienceau.4c00058
ACS Nanosci. Au 2025, 5, 153−164
156

sub-nanoclusters. However, as shown in Figure 2(a), the
inclusion of a Pt atom increases the magnitude of Eb
clu by
between 6.1% (Cu11Pt) and 17.1% (Cu3Pt). This stabilization
can be attributed to the higher cohesive energy of Pt (5.84 eV
per atom) compared to Cu (3.49 eV per atom).62 Correspond-
ingly, due to the larger atomic radius of Pt (1.39 Å) compared
to Cu (1.28 Å),62 there is a 0.9% to 1.9% increase in the
average bond length (dav) of CuPt sub-nanoclusters relative to
their Cu counterparts (Figure 2(b)). In terms of geometry
reflected in the ECN (Figure 2(c)), minimal changes were
observed between the two sets. Finally, the well-established
oscillatory zigzag behavior of the total magnetic moment (mtot)
is altered (Figure 2(d)). The removal of a Cu atom causes mtot
to shift from 0 to 1.0 μB, indicating that the dominant magnetic
properties are still primarily influenced by the majority Cu
atoms, with the Pt atom contributing to the electron density
pool of the sub-nanocluster.
Given the size of our sub-nanoclusters, the electronic
character is within the molecular limit, resulting in a quasi-
discrete DOS, as shown in Figure S6. For both Cun and
Cun−1Pt systems, the total and local DOS of the occupied
states is dominated by d-states, which is typical for transition-
metal systems. This dominance increases with the number of
atoms in the sub-nanoclusters due to the broadening of the d-
states with increased coordination number. Additionally, the
LDOS is sensitive to the atomic structure. Despite Cun and
Cun−1Pt maintaining the same geometric motif, the sub-
stitution of one Cu atom with a Pt atom breaks the structural
symmetry. This symmetry breaking results in a broader LDOS
for Cun−1Pt sub-nanoclusters compared to the narrower LDOS
for Cun sub-nanoclusters. The Cun sub-nanoclusters exhibit
many degenerate states, reflected in the well-defined,
numerous sharp peaks in the LDOS. In contrast, Cun−1Pt
systems show a more spread out LDOS due to the
introduction of Pt breaking the symmetry and thus reducing
the degeneracy.
The trends observed in the average bond lengths and
binding energies of the Cun−1Pt sub-nanoclusters can be
attributed to the coordination environment of the Pt atom and
the resulting strain on the sub-nanocluster. In smaller sub-
nanoclusters like Cu3Pt, the lower coordination around the Pt
atom results in weaker bonding interactions, reflected in larger
average bond lengths and lower binding energy magnitudes.
For Cu5Pt, the increased coordination enhances Pt−Cu
bonding, leading to shorter bond lengths and higher binding
energy magnitudes. This trend persists until Cu7Pt, where
geometric factors become more dominant as the sub-
nanocluster size increases. The LDOS analysis in Figure S6
corroborates these findings, showing stronger hybridization
between Pt d-states and Cu states for Cu5Pt compared to
Cu3Pt. This enhanced hybridization explains the stronger
bonding and higher binding energy magnitudes observed for
Cu5Pt.
The presence of Pt in the Cu sub-nanoclusters significantly
influences the electronic structure, primarily by intensifying the
d-state contributions around the Fermi level in the LDOS. This
effect is evident from the qualitative charge density plots
(Figure S7) and the increased isosurface concentration around
Pt atoms, highlighted in the charge density difference plots
(Figure S8). These analyses show that the charge density in
pure Cu sub-nanoclusters remains relatively uniform, indicat-
ing an equal charge distribution throughout the system. In
contrast, CuPt sub-nanoclusters exhibit localized changes in
charge density near the Pt atoms.
The introduction of Pt breaks the structural symmetry of the
sub-nanoclusters, which is reflected in the LDOS. The
magnetization density further confirms this symmetry breaking,
as illustrated in Figure S9. The magnetization density analysis
reveals the contributions of unpaired spins per atom to the
overall magnetization of the sub-nanocluster. All spins are
paired in pure Cu sub-nanoclusters, resulting in no net local
magnetic moment. However, in CuPt sub-nanoclusters,
unpaired spins are observed around the Pt and nearby Cu
atoms, indicating that these regions significantly contribute to
the sub-nanocluster’s magnetic moment. This confirms that
adding a Pt atom not only disrupts the charge distribution but
also enhances the magnetic properties of the sub-nanoclusters
by introducing unpaired spins.
3.2. Molecular Adsorption
After selecting and characterizing the substrates for molecular
adsorption, i.e., the lowest energy Cun and Cun−1Pt sub-
nanoclusters, we confirmed the main properties of the H2
molecule: binding energy
E
(
)
b
H2 , equilibrium bond length
(dH−H), and vibrational frequency (ν). Specifically, we
obtained
=
E
2.27eV
b
H2
, dH−H = 0.75 Å, and ν = 4328
cm−1, which are in excellent agreement with experimental
data.65,66 To provide a more accurate total energy for H2,
including the zero-point energy (ZPE) reflecting the vibra-
tional energy of the quantum mechanical ground state, we
recalculated the H2 molecule’s energy. This calculation was
performed at 1 atm pressure and 300 K, incorporating the
Gibbs free energy. The ZPE value obtained is 0.268 eV,
aligning well with the experimental value of ≈0.270 eV
reported by Irikura.67
Next, we investigated H2 adsorption on all nonequivalent
top, bridge, and hollow sites of the Cun and Cun−1Pt sub-
nanoclusters (n = 4, 6, 8, 10, and 12), leading to the formation
of H2/Cun and H2/Cun−1Pt systems, considering both H2-
bonding modes: side-on and end-on.49 The resulting lowest
energy configurations are shown in Figure 3. For all sizes of
Cun sub-nanoclusters, H2 preferentially adsorbs on the Cu top
(1-fold) sites, where each H atom interacts with a Cu atom. In
this case, the lowest energy H2Cun configurations are
characterized by side-on motifs, with both H atoms aligned
parallel to the Cun sub-nanoclusters (dihydrogen binding). In
contrast, for Cun−1Pt sub-nanoclusters, H2 prefers to bind at
the Pt top sites, resulting in each H atom interacting with a Pt
atom after structural optimization. Consequently, the lowest
Figure 2. Comparison between Cun and Cun−1Pt properties: (a) the
magnitude of the binding energy (|Eb
clu|), (b) the average bond length
(dav), (c) the effective coordination number (ECN), and (d) the total
magnetic moment (mtot), as a function of the atoms number (n).
ACS Nanoscience Au
pubs.acs.org/nanoau
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnanoscienceau.4c00058
ACS Nanosci. Au 2025, 5, 153−164
157

energy H2/Cun−1Pt configurations lead to H2 dissociation.
While we did not specifically test for the dissociation mode of
H2, it emerges as the result of our structural optimizations. The
inclusion of the Pt atom introduces significant changes
compared to Cu-only sub-nanoclusters, such as an increased
equilibrium distance within the H2 molecule, weakening the
H−H bond and potentially causing chemical dissociation,
leading to hydridic-like bonding (see our discussion on charge
analysis).
Notably, for n = 10, we observe H atoms binding to both Cu
and Pt, indicating the potential breakage of the H2 molecular
bond due to the influence of the Pt atom. Additionally, for n =
12, we observe significant structural distortion triggered by H2
adsorption on the Pt atom. These findings underscore the
significant impact of Pt substitution on the adsorption behavior
and structural stability of Cu sub-nanoclusters, revealing
enhanced interactions and potential chemical activation sites
due to the presence of Pt.
To deepen our understanding of adsorbed systems, we
calculated several relevant properties: |Eads|, dClu‑mol, Δdav,
ΔECN, mtot, ΔdH−H upon molecular adsorption as a function
of n. These adsorption properties are depicted in Figure 4 for
the lowest energy H2/Cun systems, which retain the H−H
bond (w/ H−H); the most stable state among those
configurations with relatively higher energy level H2/Cun−1Pt
systems, which also retain the H−H bond (w/ H−H); and the
lowest energy H2/Cun−1Pt systems, which do not retain the
H−H bond (w/o H−H). In Figure 4(a), the |Eads| trend is
shown. Since adsorption energy measures the magnitude of the
binding energy of the H2 molecule to the sub-nanocluster, we
can see that CuPt sub-nanoclusters have higher |Eads| values,
indicating a stronger nanocluster-molecule interaction. This
underscores the significant role of the Pt atom in the Cu-based
sub-nanoclusters. The highest adsorption energy magnitudes
occur for the smallest sub-nanoclusters (n = 4), while the
lowest occur for the largest (n = 12). Sub-nanoclusters with n =
6, 8, and 10 atoms exhibit intermediate values that follow this
trend consistently.
Even when considering higher energy H2/CuPt systems that
maintain the H−H bond, the most stable isomers after
adsorption are still more energetically favorable than H2/Cu
systems, with one exception at n = 10 (practically degenerate at
0.04 eV). Consequently, this result reveals that the presence of
Pt not only intensifies the interaction but also naturally
promotes the breaking of the H2 bond due to the significant
distance between the H atoms in these systems. Our results for
the Eads concerning H2/Cun systems are in good agreement
with the literature,26 while the findings for H2/Cun−1Pt
corroborate the beneficial synergistic effects of combining Cu
and Pt.58
Comparing the adsorption energies (Eads) of H2 on CuPt
(w/o H−H) and Cu (w/ H−H) systems, we observe that the
presence of Pt and its interaction with H2 generally intensifies
the interaction by at least 0.5 eV for most cluster sizes.
However, for n = 12, the shift in adsorption energy is only 0.2
eV. This slight decrease is due to part of the interaction energy
being directed toward the structural change of the sub-
nanocluster, altering its geometry in the region close to the
adsorption site. The stronger interaction of the molecule with
the CuPt (w/o H−H) systems compared to Cu (w/ H−H)
and CuPt (w/ H−H) systems is supported by the closer
proximity of the molecule to the sub-nanocluster, as shown by
dClu‑mol in Figure 4(b).
The greater nanocluster-molecule interaction from a
structural standpoint is evident in the higher values of relative
deviation given by Δdav and ΔECN upon molecular adsorption
for PtCu relative to Cu systems, as shown in Figure 4(c) and
(d), respectively. While purely Cu systems (and CuPt w/ H−
H) exhibit almost constant relative deviation, indicating a
slight expansion of the sub-nanocluster bonds after adsorption
and unchanged coordination of the sub-nanoclusters, systems
with CuPt (w/o H−H) show a greater expansion of dav as the
size of the sub-nanoclusters decreases. This expansion
transforms into a contraction and compaction for n = 12,
reflecting the change in structural motif due to adsorption and
resulting in a decrease in coordination assumed by the new
distorted structure.
In terms of magnetic properties, we observed from Figure
4(e) that the adsorption of H2 does not significantly alter the
spin configuration to the extent of changing the mtot values.
Figure 3. Lowest energy H2/Cun and H2Cun−1Pt systems, where n =
4, 6, 8, 10, and 12.
Figure 4. Comparison between H2/Cun and H2/Cun−1Pt properties:
(a) adsorption energy magnitude (|Eads|), (b) minimum cluster-
molecule distance (dClu‑mol), (c) relative deviation for dav (Δdav) upon
molecular adsorption, (d) relative deviation for ECN (ΔECN) upon
molecular adsorption, (e) total magnetic moment (mtot), and (f)
relative deviation for dH−H (ΔdH−H) upon molecular adsorption, as a
function of the number of atoms (n), where n = 4, 6, 8, 10, and 12.
Data in blue filled circles (continuous line) describe the lowest energy
H2/Cun systems where there is a H−H bond (w/ H−H); data in red
filled squares (continuous line) describe the most stable higher energy
H2/Cun−1Pt systems where there is a H−H bond (w/ H−H); data in
red empty squares (dashed line) describe the lowest energy H2/
Cun−1Pt systems where there is not a H−H bond (w/o H−H).
ACS Nanoscience Au
pubs.acs.org/nanoau
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnanoscienceau.4c00058
ACS Nanosci. Au 2025, 5, 153−164
158

The magnetic moment trend continues to be dictated by the
electronic character of Cu atoms for the adsorbed systems,
where we have mtot = 0.0 μB or 1.0 μB for clusters with even or
odd numbers of Cu atoms, respectively. However, in electronic
terms, we observed a greater influence of H2 adsorption on the
sub-nanoclusters in the LDOS, as depicted in Figure S10. Due
to the limited number of reactive sites in finite sub-
nanoclusters, the adsorption of just one molecule onto the
sub-nanocluster surface is adequate to reduce the highest
density of states in the region close to the Fermi level. This
effect is illustrated in Figure S11, where we compare the center
of gravity of the occupied d-states (εd)68 for the sub-
nanoclusters before and after adsorption. The εd can be
associated with the adsorption energy of H2, which can
indirectly influence the reactivity of the systems; the closer the
εd approaches the Fermi level, the more reactive they become.
Notably, the εd for Cu is closer to the Fermi level than the εd
for Pt d-states, even though Cu d-states are filled. This
observation can be explained by the localized nature of the Cu
3d-states.
Finally, Figure 4(f) shows the relative deviation in the
equilibrium distance of the H2 molecule upon adsorption,
compared to its value in the gas phase (0.75 Å). Notably, the
values of ΔdH−H are presented for Cu (w/ H−H bond) and
CuPt (w/ H−H bond), representing cases where the H−H
bond remains intact. This comparison is crucial because, for
the most stable H2/CuPt configurations, H2 dissociates.
Adsorption on Cun sub-nanoclusters increases the H−H
bond distance compared to the gas-phase molecule, with the
distance increasing further until the molecule dissociates on
Cun−1Pt systems. The distances between H atoms range from
1.87 Å for n = 4 to 2.27 Å for n = 12, indicating a very weak
interaction between the H atoms. This result is corroborated
by Figure S12, which shows a significant decrease in the
vibrational frequency values, from the gas-phase H2 molecule
to the Cu-based sub-nanoclusters, and further to the CuPt-
based sub-nanoclusters, where only a very weak chemical bond
exists between the H atoms. The lowest ν values between H
atoms on CuPt, relative to Cu, are fully consistent with the
highest Eads magnitudes and dH−H values. Furthermore, the
most stable configurations, dihydrogen (H2 side-on) adsorp-
tion for Cun sub-nanoclusters and H2 dissociation for Cun−1Pt
sub-nanoclusters, are further supported by the estimation of
activation and reaction energies, as presented in Figure S13.
Additionally, the atomic configurations for H2/Cun−1Pt sub-
nanoclusters, considering the most stable higher-energy H2/
Cun−1Pt systems where the H−H bond is intact (w/ H−H),
are presented in Figure S14, along with the corresponding
relative total energies compared to the lowest-energy H2/
Cun−1Pt configurations (w/o H−H).
3.3. Interaction Mechanism
To enhance our understanding of the enhanced interaction
between Cun−1Pt and H2 facilitated by the Pt atom, we
conducted detailed energetic analyses. First, in Figure 5(a), we
present a comparative analysis of the binding energies of the
two sub-nanocluster compositions using eq 3 to calculate
ΔEb
clu. Both compositions exhibit stability with negative
binding energies. However, a clear energetic preference for
Cun−1Pt sub-nanoclusters over Cun sub-nanoclusters for the
same n values is observed. Furthermore, the greater
stabilization is more pronounced in smaller sub-nanoclusters
due to the presence of the Pt atom. Specifically, we find values
of ΔEb
clu following the order: 17.1% for n = 4, 9.3% for n = 6,
7.9% for n = 8, 7.5% for n = 10, and 6.1% for n = 12.
In principle, the higher stability observed for CuPt sub-
nanoclusters might suggest lower reactivity toward the H2
molecule. However, our analysis in Figure 5(b) reveals the
competition among the main additive energy terms of the
adsorbed systems (see eq 8). For the H2/Cun systems, the
highest energetic contribution (in absolute value) originates
from the binding energy of the molecule (−2.27 eV), followed
by that of the sub-nanocluster (ranging from −1.61 eV for n =
4 to −2.36 eV for n = 12), with the H2-clu interaction energy
being the third in magnitude (from −0.88 eV for n = 4 to
−0.47 eV for n = 12). For the H2/Cun-1Pt systems, we observe
a significantly intensified interaction energy due to the
presence of the Pt atom, with ΔEint ranging from −5.09 to
−6.15 eV. Here, Eb
H2 contributes the second largest magnitude,
while Eb
clu ranks third (from −1.88 eV for n = 4 to −2.51 eV for
n = 12). Consequently, we have demonstrated that, apart from
being more stable, CuPt-based sub-nanoclusters are also the
most reactive, exhibiting high interaction energy values with
H2.
In Figure 5(c), we present a comprehensive overview of the
energy term contributions that govern the definitions of Eads
(eq 4) and Eb,ads (eq 8). Essentially, we observe that all terms
involved in these equations are additive (account for negative
energy values), except for the distortion energy terms ( Edis
H2
and ΔEdis
clu), which represent penalties or positive energy terms.
These distortion energies reflect energy losses due to structural
adjustments arising from adsorption, leading to changes in the
configurations of the sub-nanoclusters and the molecule from
their lowest energy structures. In this context, we can correlate
the values of
Edis
H2 and ΔEdis
clu with the Δdav, ΔECN, and
ΔdH−H values. We observe minimal structural penalties for
most systems, except for molecules adsorbed in CuPt-based
Figure 5. Energetic analysis: (a) relative binding energy, involving
ΔEb
clu for comparing sub-nanoclusters; (b) energy competition among
Eb
H2, Eb
clu, and ΔEint (per atom); and (c) the main energy terms for the
energetic analysis, considering the adsorption (Eads) and binding
(Eb,ads) energies for the lowest energy H2/clu systems.
ACS Nanoscience Au
pubs.acs.org/nanoau
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnanoscienceau.4c00058
ACS Nanosci. Au 2025, 5, 153−164
159

systems, which exhibit high
Edis
H2 values. This is attributed to
the dissociation (breaking of H−H bonds) of these molecules
due to the substantial interaction (ΔEint) with CuPt-based sub-
nanoclusters.
Combining the insights from Figure 5(b) and (c), we can
delineate the mechanism underlying H2 adsorption on the sub-
nanoclusters. In the H2/Cun scenario, the binding energies of
the sub-nanocluster and the molecule overlap the interaction
energy, indicating a typical adsorption process characterized by
moderate interaction, which allows for potential molecular
desorption. This suggests that the sub-nanoclusters and the
molecules maintain structural and constitutional integrity.
However, for the H2/Cun-1Pt systems, we observe a distinct
scenario. Here, the interaction with the Pt atom plays a pivotal
role by providing an interaction energy that exceeds the
binding energies of the sub-nanocluster and the molecule.
Furthermore, the binding energy of the cluster surpasses that
of the molecule. Consequently, the H2−Cun-1Pt interaction is
sufficiently strong to induce molecule dissociation initially,
observed across all studied sub-nanocluster sizes, and
subsequently lead to greater distortions in the sub-nano-
clusters, as evidenced in the case of n = 12.
In Figure 6, our energy analysis is complemented by effective
Bader charge analysis, where the charge transfer is calculated as
ΔQBader = Zval −QBader, with Zval representing the number of
valence electrons and QBader the Bader charge, for the most
stable H2/clu systems. A minimal charge exchange indicates
weak interaction between H2 and Cun sub-nanoclusters,
whereas a pronounced charge exchange is observed in H2
and Cun−1Pt systems, which reflects a net charge transfer from
the CuPt sub-nanocluster (cationic) to the H atoms (anionic).
As noted by Lamanec et al.,69 a standard hydrogen bond
involves a protonic hydrogen (with a partial positive charge)
interacting with an electron donor, similar to the dihydrogen
binding motifs in H2/Cun. In contrast, the H2/Cun−1Pt system
resembles a hydridic hydrogen bond, where a hydridic
hydrogen (with a partial negative charge) interacts with an
electron acceptor, albeit with some reservations.
Our findings on H2 adsorption on Cu and CuPt sub-
nanoclusters corroborate well-established knowledge regarding
the different chemical nature of these binding situations.70−72
The dihydrogen binding motifs in the H2/Cun sub-nano-
clusters represent a weak interaction, where the H2 molecule
interacts with a metal surface atom from Cun, a site capable of
accepting electron density. This interaction typically involves
charge transfer from the metal into the H−H antibonding
orbital, leading to some back-donation and slight weakening of
the H−H bond without breaking it. The H2 molecule retains
its molecular form, and the bonding is primarily physisorption
or weak chemisorption. This interaction is not a hydridic
hydrogen bond because the H2 molecule remains intact, with
no evidence of hydridic or protic character in the individual
hydrogen atoms.
In contrast, in the H2/Cun−1Pt system, the H2 molecule
dissociates, resulting in two H atoms adsorbed on the sub-
nanocluster. This occurs because the Pt atom introduces
stronger interaction between the molecule and the sub-
nanocluster, activating the H−H bond breaking, facilitated
by the electronic properties of Pt, which has a higher ability to
stabilize the resulting H atoms via chemisorption (due to its
higher affinity for H). This activation is supported by our
Bader charge analysis, where substantial charge transfer from
the sub-nanocluster to the hydrogen molecule occurs. The Pt
atom draws electron density from the sub-nanocluster,
enabling the H−H bond to break and leaving two adsorbed
H atoms. The resulting system involves metal−hydrogen
bonds, with the individual H atoms chemisorbed to the sub-
nanocluster surface. Hydric bonding typically involves a
hydride (H−) species forming an attractive interaction with
an electrophilic center. In the case of H2/Cun−1Pt, the
dissociated H atoms are negatively charged upon adsorption,
but they do not act as hydrides. Instead, they are individually
chemisorbed, with their bonding dominated by localized
Figure 6. Bader charge flow, ΔQBader, for H2/Cun and H2/Cun−1Pt systems. The yellow isosurface represents charge density losses per atom, while
the cyan isosurface represents corresponding gains per atom. Effective charge exchanges between sub-nanoclusters and molecules are also depicted
in nominal values, in units of e. The ΔQBader values of the adsorption site atoms are highlighted in the figure. In all cases, the isosurfaces are set to
0.005.
ACS Nanoscience Au
pubs.acs.org/nanoau
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnanoscienceau.4c00058
ACS Nanosci. Au 2025, 5, 153−164
160

metal−hydrogen interactions. The positive charge on the CuPt
sub-nanocluster indicates that the sub-nanocluster is donating
electron density, likely facilitated by the Pt atom, which
exhibits higher catalytic activity and a strong affinity for
adsorbates like H2. While electron density transfer creates a
partial hydridic character in H2, the bonding mechanism is
more accurately described as H2 dissociation, forming direct
metal−hydrogen bonds. For hydridic bonding, negative charge
would need to be predominantly localized on the hydrogen
atoms (not on the intact H2 molecule), with weak interactions
between hydridic hydrogens and electrophilic species, such as
secondary interactions rather than strong chemisorption.
Therefore, the charge transfer observed in the Bader analysis
suggests a strong interaction with partial hydridic character. In
essence, the substitution of a Cu atom with a Pt atom enhances
electron density flow from Cu to Pt. Finally, Table S8 presents
the hybridization indices, supporting our interaction mecha-
nism, showing larger sd hybridization and negligible sp
hybridization for the systems.
4. CONCLUSIONS
Our DFT-PBE+D3 calculations provide valuable insights into
the intricate interactions between H2 molecules and both Cun
and Cun−1Pt sub-nanoclusters. We elucidated the adsorption
behavior and underlying mechanisms governing these inter-
actions through rigorous computational simulations and
energetic analyses. Initially, we conducted a thorough
investigation of Cun sub-nanoclusters (n = 2−14) as potential
substrates for adsorption. This involved comprehensive
energetic, structural, and electronic characterizations, culmi-
nating in the selection of the lowest energy sizes (4, 6, 8, 10,
and 12) using a stability function. Subsequently, we explored
the substitution of a single Cu atom with a Pt atom in the
context of SAA sub-nanoclusters, resulting in the formation of
Cun−1Pt sub-nanoclusters. Despite structural similarities
between Cun and Cun−1Pt systems, the presence of Pt
significantly enhanced the stabilization, as indicated by the
binding energy and corroborated by vibrational frequency
analyses and AIMD simulations. Upon identifying the lowest
energy adsorption sites for both H2/Cun and H2/Cun−1Pt
systems, we observed distinct behaviors. While Cu-only sub-
nanoclusters exhibited a H2-bonding mode known as H2 side-
on, with weak interactions and minimal charge exchange, the
SAA sub-nanoclusters displayed a different H2-bonding mode,
characterized by molecular dissociation. This resulted in strong
interactions, marked by substantial charge transfer from the
sub-nanoclusters to the H2 molecules. The presence of Pt not
only intensified the interaction but also facilitated the breaking
of the H2 bond. This effect was further underscored by
significantly enhanced interaction energies in CuPt-based
systems (interaction energy magnitude from 5.09 to 6.15
eV), surpassing those in Cu-only systems (interaction energy
magnitude from 0.47 to 0.88 eV). In the H2/Cu scenario, the
binding energies of the sub-nanocluster and the molecule
overlapped with the interaction energy, suggesting a typical
adsorption process with moderate interaction. Conversely, in
H2/CuPt systems, the interaction with Pt atoms exceeded the
binding energies of both the sub-nanocluster and the molecule,
leading to molecular dissociation and subsequent distortions in
the sub-nanoclusters. Our findings highlight the pivotal role of
Pt atoms in enhancing the interaction between H2 molecules
and sub-nanocluster substrates. The presence of Pt introduces
significant energetic modifications, resulting in intensified
adsorption energies and altered charge transfer dynamics.
Notably, SAA CuPt-based sub-nanoclusters exhibited clear
preferences over pure Cu counterparts in terms of stability and
reactivity toward H2 adsorption, underscoring the synergistic
effects arising from the Cu−Pt combination. In addition to
our computational approaches, we recognize the potential of
machine learning (ML) algorithms in exploring more extensive
and more complex sub-nanocluster systems. By leveraging
advanced ML techniques, such as the Bayesian Optimization
algorithm, it is possible to efficiently navigate the vast
configurational space of sub-nanoclusters with more significant
numbers of atoms. This approach can identify promising
candidates for enhanced H2 adsorption and catalytic activity by
predicting stable and active sub-nanocluster configurations
without exhaustive computational resources. Integrating ML
algorithms with our DFT-PBE+D3 calculations could sig-
nificantly accelerate the discovery and optimization of high-
performance nanocatalysts, paving the way for innovative
advancements in hydrogen-related technologies.
■ASSOCIATED CONTENT
*
sı Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available free of charge at
https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsnanoscienceau.4c00058.
Convergence tests, sub-nanocluster vibrational frequen-
cies, the impact of alternative functionals (TPSS), the
relativistic effects of spin−orbit coupling (SOC), sub-
nanoclusters properties, ab initio molecular dynamics
(AIMD) simulations, density of states for sub-nano-
clusters, electronic charge analysis, magnetic analysis,
density of states for adsorbed systems, center of gravity
of the occupied d state, H2 vibrational frequencies,
estimation of activation energy, H2/Cun−1Pt atomic
configuration (w/ H−H), hybridization index, and
atomic coordinates (PDF)
■AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Author
Maurício J. Piotrowski −Department of Physics, Federal
University of Pelotas, 96010-900 Pelotas, Rio Grande do Sul,
Brazil;
orcid.org/0000-0003-3477-4437;
Email: mauriciomjp@gmail.com
Authors
João Paulo Cerqueira Felix −Institute of Physics “Armando
Dias Tavares”, Rio de Janeiro State University, 20550-900
Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil;
orcid.org/0000-
0002-7064-9660
Wanderson Souza Araújo −Department of Physics, Federal
University of Pelotas, 96010-900 Pelotas, Rio Grande do Sul,
Brazil;
orcid.org/0000-0003-1106-7350
João Marcos Tomaz Palheta −Department of Physics,
Federal University of Pelotas, 96010-900 Pelotas, Rio Grande
do Sul, Brazil
Jônatas Favotto Dalmedico −Department of Physics, Federal
University of Pelotas, 96010-900 Pelotas, Rio Grande do Sul,
Brazil
Fabiano Pereira de Oliveira −Department of Physics, Federal
University of Pelotas, 96010-900 Pelotas, Rio Grande do Sul,
Brazil
ACS Nanoscience Au
pubs.acs.org/nanoau
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnanoscienceau.4c00058
ACS Nanosci. Au 2025, 5, 153−164
161

Alexandre C. Dias −Institute of Physics and International
Center of Physics, University of Brasília, 70919-970 Brasília,
Federal District, Brazil
Diego Guedes-Sobrinho −Chemistry Department, Federal
University of Paraná, 81531-980 Curitiba, Paraná, Brazil;
orcid.org/0000-0002-3313-2822
Celso R. C. Rêgo −Institute of Nanotechnology Hermann-
von-Helmholtz-Platz, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology,
76021 Karlsruhe, Germany
Renato L. T. Parreira −Núcleo de Pesquisas em Ciências
Exatas e Tecnológicas, Universidade de Franca, 14404−600
Franca, São Paulo, Brazil;
orcid.org/0000-0002-5623-
9833
Complete contact information is available at:
https://pubs.acs.org/10.1021/acsnanoscienceau.4c00058
Author Contributions
CRediT: João Paulo Cerqueira Felix data curation,
investigation, validation; Wanderson Souza Araújo formal
analysis, investigation, validation; Joao Marcos Tomaz Palheta
data curation, formal analysis, validation; Jônatas Favotto
Dalmedico formal analysis, methodology, validation; Fabiano
Pereira de Oliveira formal analysis, methodology, validation;
Alexandre C. Dias data curation, validation, writing - review &
editing; Diego Guedes-Sobrinho data curation, validation,
writing - review & editing; Celso R. C. Rêgo data curation,
validation, writing - review & editing; Renato Luis Tame
Parreira data curation, validation, writing - review & editing;
Maurício Jeomar Piotrowski conceptualization, funding
acquisition, project administration, resources, supervision,
writing - original draft, writing - review & editing.
Funding
The Article Processing Charge for the publication of this
research was funded by the Coordination for the Improvement
of Higher Education Personnel - CAPES (ROR identifier:
00x0ma614).
Notes
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
■ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank the Rio Grande do Sul Research
Foundation (FAPERGS, grant 24/2551−0001551−5), the
Federal District Research Support Foundation (FAPDF, grants
00193−00001817/2023−43 and 00193−00002073/2023−
84), the São Paulo Research Foundation −FAPESP
(R.L.T.P. grant numbers 2011/07623-8 and 2017/24856-2),
the National Council for Scientific and Technological
Development −CNPq (M.J.P. grant number 307345/2021-
1, A.C.D. grant numbers 408144/2022−0 and 305174/2023−
1, and R.L.T.P. grant number 311122/2021-3), the Coordi-
nation for Improvement of Higher Level Education −CAPES
(finance Code 001) for the financial support. C.R.C.R. thanks
the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research
(BMBF) for financial support of the project Innovation-
Platform MaterialDigital (www.materialdigital.de) through
project funding FKZ number: 13XP5094A. Part of this work
was performed on the HoreKa supercomputer funded by the
Ministry of Science, Research and the Arts Baden-Württem-
berg and by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research.
The authors also thank the infrastructure provided to our
computer cluster by the Department of Physics from the
Federal University of Pelotas. This work also used resources of
the “Centro Nacional de Processamento de Alto Desempenho
em São Paulo” (CENAPAD−SP, UNICAMP/FINEP -
MCTI), projects 897 and 570; of the “Centro Nacional de
Supercomputação (CESUP−UFRGS)”; of the Lobo Carneiro
HPC (NACAD) at the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro
(UFRJ) for resources for project 133; of the CIMATEC
SENAI at Salvador −BA, for their partnership and support
through the Ogun Supercomputer; and of the “Laboratório
Central de Processamento de Alto Desempenho” (LCPAD)
financed by FINEP through CT-INFRA/UFPR projects.
■REFERENCES
(1) Bell, A. T. The Impact of Nanoscience on Heterogeneous
Catalysis. Science 2003, 299, 1688−1691.
(2) Friend, C. M.; Xu, B. Heterogeneous Catalysis: A Central
Science for a Sustainable Future. Acc. Chem. Res. 2017, 50, 517−521.
(3) Li, X.; Mitchell, S.; Fang, Y.; Li, J.; Perez-Ramirez, J.; Lu, J.
Advances in heterogeneous single-cluster catalysis. Nat. Rev. Chem.
2023, 7, 754−767.
(4) Alonso, J. A. Electronic and Atomic Structure, and Magnetism of
Transition-Metal Clusters. Chem. Rev. 2000, 100, 637−678.
(5) Fernando, A.; Weerawardene, K. L. D. M.; Karimova, N. V.;
Aikens, C. M. Quantum Mechanical Studies of Large Metal, Metal
Oxide, and Metal Chalcogenide Nanoparticles and Clusters. Chem.
Rev. 2015, 115, 6112−6216.
(6) Liu, L.; Corma, A. Metal Catalysts for Heterogeneous Catalysis:
From Single Atoms to Nanoclusters and Nanoparticles. Chem. Rev.
2018, 118, 4981−5079.
(7) Yue, M.; Lambert, H.; Pahon, E.; Roche, R.; Jemei, S.; Hissel, D.
Hydrogen energy systems: A critical review of technologies,
applications, trends and challenges. Renewable Sust. Energy Rev.
2021, 146, 111180.
(8) Singla, M. K.; Nijhawan, P.; Oberoi, A. S. Hydrogen fuel and fuel
cell technology for cleaner future: a review. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res.
2021, 28, 15607−15626.
(9) Hannagan, R. T.; Giannakakis, G.; Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, M.;
Sykes, E. C. H. Single-Atom Alloy Catalysis. Chem. Rev. 2020, 120,
12044−12088.
(10) Du, Y.; Sheng, H.; Astruc, D.; Zhu, M. Atomically Precise
Noble Metal Nanoclusters as Efficient Catalysts: A Bridge between
Structure and Properties. Chem. Rev. 2020, 120, 526−622.
(11) Janjua, M. R. S. A. Prediction and Understanding: Quantum
Chemical Framework of Transition Metals Enclosed in a B12N12
Inorganic Nanocluster for Adsorption and Removal of DDT from the
Environment. Inorg. Chem. 2021, 60, 10837.
(12) Wang, S.; Lu, A.; Zhong, C.-J. Hydrogen production from water
electrolysis: role of catalysts. Nano Converg 2021, 8, 4.
(13) Tyo, E. C.; Vajda, S. Catalysis by clusters with precise numbers
of atoms. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2015, 10, 577−588.
(14) Tang, Q.; Hu, G.; Fung, V.; Jiang, D. Insights into interfaces,
stability, electronic properties, and catalytic activities of atomically
precise metal nanoclusters from first principles. Acc. Chem. Res. 2018,
51, 2793−2802.
(15) Zhang, W.; Fu, Q.; Luo, Q.; Sheng, L.; Yang, J. Understanding
Single-Atom Catalysis in View of Theory. JACS Au 2021, 1, 2130−
2145.
(16) Darby, M. T.; Stamatakis, M.; Michaelides, A.; Sykes, E. C. H.
Lonely Atoms with Special Gifts: Breaking Linear Scaling Relation-
ships in Heterogeneous Catalysis with Single-Atom Alloys. J. Phys.
Chem. Lett. 2018, 9, 5636−5646.
(17) Giannakakis, G.; Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, M.; Sykes, E. C. H.
Single-Atom Alloys as a Reductionist Approach to the Rational
Design of Heterogeneous Catalysts. Acc. Chem. Res. 2019, 52, 237−
247.
(18) Bunting, R. J.; Wodaczek, F.; Torabi, T.; Cheng, B. Reactivity
of Single-Atom Alloy Nanoparticles: Modeling the Dehydrogenation
of Propane. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2023, 145, 14894−14902.
ACS Nanoscience Au
pubs.acs.org/nanoau
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnanoscienceau.4c00058
ACS Nanosci. Au 2025, 5, 153−164
162

(19) Liu, X.; Astruc, D. Atomically precise copper nanoclusters and
their applications. Coord. Chem. Rev. 2018, 359, 112−126.
(20) Baghdasaryan, A.; Bürgi, T. Copper nanoclusters: designed
synthesis, structural diversity, and multiplatform applications. Nano-
scale 2021, 13, 6283−6340.
(21) Wu, Q.-J.; Si, D.-H.; Sun, P.-P.; Dong, Y.-L.; Zheng, S.; Chen,
Q.; Ye, S.-H.; Sun, D.; Cao, R.; Huang, Y.-B. Atomically Precise
Copper Nanoclusters for Highly Efficient Electroreduction of CO2
towards Hydrocarbons via Breaking the Coordination Symmetry of
Cu Site. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2023, 62, No. e202306822.
(22) Chu, X.; Xiang, M.; Zeng, Q.; Zhu, W.; Yang, M. Competition
Between Monomer and Dimer Fragmentation Pathways of Cationic
Cun Clusters of n = 2 −20. J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 2011, 44,
205103.
(23) Chaves, A. S.; Rondina, G. G.; Piotrowski, M. J.; Tereshchuk,
P.; Da Silva, J. L. F. The Role of Charge States in the Atomic
Structure of Cun and Ptn (n = 2 −14 Atoms) Clusters: A DFT
Investigation. J. Phys. Chem. A 2014, 118, 10813−10821.
(24) Zhang, L.; Liu, H.; Liu, S.; Banis, M. N.; Song, Z.; Li, J.; Yang,
L.; Markiewicz, M.; Zhao, Y.; Li, R.; Zheng, M.; Ye, S.; Zhao, Z.-J.;
Botton, G. A.; Sun, X. Pt/Pd Single-Atom Alloys as Highly Active
Electrochemical Catalysts and the Origin of Enhanced Activity. ACS
Catal. 2019, 9, 9350−9358.
(25) Zhang, X.; Cui, G.; Feng, H.; Chen, L.; Wang, H.; Wang, B.;
Zhang, X.; Zheng, L.; Hong, S.; Wei, M. Platinum-copper single atom
alloy catalysts with high performance towards glycerol hydrogenolysis.
Nat. Commun. 2019, 10, 5812.
(26) Kuang, X.-J.; Wang, X.-Q.; Liu, G.-B. A density functional study
on the adsorption of hydrogen molecule onto small copper clusters. J.
Chem. Sci. 2011, 123, 743−754.
(27) Janjua, M. R. S. A. Hydrogen as an energy currency:
Encapsulation of inorganic Ga12N12 with alkali metals for efficient
H2 adsorption as hydrogen storage materials. J. Phys. Chem. Solids
2022, 160, 110352.
(28) Hohenberg, P.; Kohn, W. Inhomogeneous Electron Gas. Phys.
Rev. 1964, 136, B864−B871.
(29) Kohn, W.; Sham, L. J. Self-Consistent Equations Including
Exchange and Correlation Effects. Phys. Rev. 1965, 140, A1133−
A1138.
(30) Perdew, J. P.; Burke, K.; Ernzerhof, M. Generalized Gradient
Approximation Made Simple. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1996, 77, 3865−3868.
(31) Grimme, S.; Antony, J.; Ehrlich, S.; Krieg, H. A Consistent and
Accurate Ab Initio Parametrization of Density Functional Dispersion
Correction (DFT-D) for the 94 Elements H-Pu. J. Chem. Phys. 2010,
132, 154104.
(32) Grimme, S.; Hansen, A.; Brandenburg, J. G.; Bannwarth, C.
Dispersion-Corrected Mean-Field Electronic Structure Methods.
Chem. Rev. 2016, 116, 5105−5154.
(33) Blöchl, P. E. Projector Augmented-Wave Method. Phys. Rev. B
1994, 50, 17953−17979.
(34) Kresse, G.; Joubert, D. From Ultrasoft Pseudopotentials to the
Projector Agumented-Wave Method. Phys. Rev. B 1999, 59, 1758−
1775.
(35) Kresse, G.; Hafner, J. Ab Initio Molecular Dynamics for Open-
Shell Transition Metals. Phys. Rev. B 1993, 48, 13115−13126.
(36) Kresse, G.; Furthmüller, J. Efficient Iterative Schemes for Ab
Initio Total-Energy Calculations Using a Plane-Wave Basis Set. Phys.
Rev. B 1996, 54, 11169−11186.
(37) Koelling, D. D.; Harmon, B. N. A technique for relativistic spin-
polarised calculations. J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys. 1977, 10, 3107.
(38) Takeda, T. The Scalar Relativistic Approximation. Z. Phys. B:
Condens. Matter Quanta 1978, 32, 43−48.
(39) Sun, L.; Hase, W. L. Born−Oppenheimer Direct Dynamics
Classical Trajectory Simulations. In Reviews in Computational
Chemistry; John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., 2003; Chapter 3, pp 79−146.
(40) Nosé, S. A molecular dynamics method for simulations in the
canonical ensemble. Mol. Phys. 1984, 52, 255−268.
(41) Hoover, W. G. Canonical dynamics: Equilibrium phase-space
distributions. Phys. Rev. A 1985, 31, 1695−1697.
(42) Chaves, A. S.; Piotrowski, M. J.; Da Silva, J. L. F. Evolution of
the Structural, Energetic, and Electronic Properties of the 3d, 4d, and
5d Transition-Metal Clusters (30 TMn Systems for n= 2−15): A
Density Functional Theory Investigation. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.
2017, 19, 15484−15502.
(43) Rêgo, C. R. C.; Oliveira, L. N.; Tereshchuk, P.; Da Silva, J. L. F.
Comparative study of van der Waals corrections to the bulk properties
of graphite. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 2015, 27, 415502.
(44) Rêgo, C. R. C.; Tereshchuk, P.; Oliveira, L. N.; Da Silva, J. L. F.
Graphene-supported small transition-metal clusters: A density func-
tional theory investigation within van der Waals corrections. Phys. Rev.
B 2017, 95, 235422.
(45) Molayem, M.; Grigoryan, V. G.; Springborg, M. Theoretical
Determination of the Most Stable Structures of NimAgn Bimetallic
Nanoalloys. J. Phys. Chem. C 2011, 115, 7179−7192.
(46) de Amorim, R. V.; Batista, K. E. A.; Nagurniak, G. R.; Orenha,
R. P.; Parreira, R. L. T.; Piotrowski, M. J. CO, NO, and SO adsorption
on Ni nanoclusters: a DFT investigation. Dalton Trans 2020, 49,
6407−6417.
(47) Felix, J. P. C. S.; Batista, K. E. A.; Morais, W. O.; Nagurniak, G.
R.; Orenha, R. P.; Rêgo, C. R. C.; Guedes-Sobrinho, D.; Parreira, R. L.
T.; Ferrer, M. M.; Piotrowski, M. J. Molecular adsorption on coinage
metal subnanoclusters: A DFT+D3 investigation. J. Comput. Chem.
2023, 44, 1040−1051.
(48) de Heer, W. A. The physics of simple metal clusters:
experimental aspects and simple models. Rev. Mod. Phys. 1993, 65,
611−676.
(49) Müllerová, S.; Malček, M.; Bucinsky, L.; Cordeiro, M. N. D. S.
Exploring hydrogen binding and activation on transition metal?
modified circumcoronene. Carb. Lett. 2024, 34, 1495−1506.
(50) Yonezawa, A. F.; Nagurniak, G. R.; Orenha, R. P.; da Silva, E.
H.; Parreira, R. L. T.; Piotrowski, M. J. Stability Changes in Iridium
Nanoclusters via Monoxide Adsorption: A DFT Study within the van
der Waals Corrections. J. Phys. Chem. A 2021, 125, 4805−4818.
(51) Sousa, K. A. P.; Morawski, F. M.; de Campos, C. E. M.;
Parreira, R. L. T.; Piotrowski, M. J.; Nagurniak, G. R.; Jost, C. L.
Electrochemical, theoretical, and analytical investigation of the
phenylurea herbicide fluometuron at a glassy carbon electrode.
Electrochim. Acta 2022, 408, 139945.
(52) Momma, K.; Izumi, F. VESTA: A Three-Dimensional
Visualization System for Electronic and Structural Analysis. J. Appl.
Crystallogr. 2008, 41, 653−658.
(53) Hoppe, R. The Coordination Number −an ”Inorganic
Chameleon. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 1970, 9, 25−34.
(54) Hoppe, R. Effective Coordination Numbers (ECoN) and Mean
Active Fictive Ionic Radii (MEFIR). Z. Kristallogr. 1979, 150, 23−52.
(55) Bader, R. F. W. Atoms in Molecules: A Quantum Theory;
International Series of Monographs on Chemistry; Clarendon Press,
1994.
(56) Tang, W.; Sanville, E.; Henkelman, G. A Grid-Based Bader
Analysis Algorithm without Lattice Bias. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter
2009, 21, 084204.
(57) Montoro, J. C. G.; Abascal, J. L. F. The Voronoi Polyhedra as
Tools for Structure Determination in Simple Disordered Systems. J.
Phys. Chem. 1993, 97, 4211−4215.
(58) Chaves, A. S.; Piotrowski, M. J.; Guedes-Sobrinho, D.; Da Silva,
J. L. F. Theoretical Investigation of the Adsorption Properties of CO,
NO, and OH on Monometallic and Bimetallic 13 −Atom Clusters:
The Example of Cu13, Pt7Cu6, and Pt13. J. Phys. Chem. A 2015, 119,
11565−11573.
(59) Tao, J.; Perdew, J. P.; Staroverov, V. N.; Scuseria, G. E.
Climbing the Density Functional Ladder: Nonempirical Meta-
Generalized Gradient Approximation Designed for Molecules and
Solids. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2003, 91, 146401.
(60) Lechtken, A.; Neiss, C.; Stairs, J.; Schooss, D. Comparative
study of the structures of copper, silver, and gold icosamers: Influence
of metal type and charge state. J. Chem. Phys. 2008, 129, 154304.
(61) Bumüller, D.; Yohannes, A. G.; Kohaut, S.; Kondov, I.; Kappes,
M. M.; Fink, K.; Schooss, D. Structures of Small Platinum Cluster
ACS Nanoscience Au
pubs.acs.org/nanoau
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnanoscienceau.4c00058
ACS Nanosci. Au 2025, 5, 153−164
163

Anions Ptn-: Experiment and Theory. J. Phys. Chem. A 2022, 126,
3502−3510.
(62) Kittel, C. Introduction to Solid State Physics, 7th ed.; John Wiley
& Sons: New York, 1996.
(63) Pauling, L. Atomic radii and interatomic distances in metals. J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 1947, 69, 542−553.
(64) Feibelman, P. J. Relaxation of hcp(0001) surfaces: A chemical
view. Phys. Rev. B 1996, 53, 13740.
(65) Huber, K.-P. Molecular Spectra and Molecular Structure: IV.
Constants of Diatomic Molecules; Springer Science & Business Media,
2013.
(66) Computational Chemistry Comparison and Benchmark DataBase
(CCCBDB); http://cccbdb.nist.gov (accessed 2024−05−23).
(67) Irikura, K. K. Experimental Vibrational Zero-Point Energies:
Diatomic Molecules. J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data 2007, 36, 389−397.
(68) Hammer, B.; Nørskov, J. K. Advances in Catalysis; Academic
Press Inc.: San Diego, 2000.
(69) Lamanec, M.; Zienertová, J.; Špet́ko, M.; Nachtigallová, D.;
Hobza, P. Similarities and Differences of Hydridic and Protonic
Hydrogen Bonding. ChemPhysChem 2024, 25, No. e202400403.
(70) Hobza, P.; Havlas, Z. Blue-Shifting Hydrogen Bonds. Chem.
Rev. 2000, 100, 4253−4264.
(71) Belkova, N. V.; Epstein, L. M.; Filippov, O. A.; Shubina, E. S.
Hydrogen and Dihydrogen Bonds in the Reactions of Metal Hydrides.
Chem. Rev. 2016, 116, 8545−8587.
(72) Civiš, S.; Lamanec, M.; Špirko, V.; Kubišta, J.; Špet́ko, M.;
Hobza, P. Hydrogen Bonding with Hydridic Hydrogen-Experimental
Low-Temperature IR and Computational Study: Is a Revised
Definition of Hydrogen Bonding Appropriate? J. Am. Chem. Soc.
2023, 145, 8550−8559.
ACS Nanoscience Au
pubs.acs.org/nanoau
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnanoscienceau.4c00058
ACS Nanosci. Au 2025, 5, 153−164
164
